# GitHub Title: Yuma_Metals
Data and analysis pertaining to Yuma project (dissertation)


## Research Dissertation Title: EVALUATING COMMUNITY-GENERATED CONCERNS REGARDING ENVIRONMENTAL CONTAMINANTS IN YUMA COUNTY, ARIZONA USING BIOSTATISTICAL MODELING AND EPIDEMIOLOGY 

by

Jenna Kristin Honan

Committee Chair: Dr. Frank von Hippel
Committee Members: Drs. Paloma Beamer and Amanda Wilson
Minor Committee Chair: Dr. Haiquan Li

Beginning August, 2022

PROJECT GOALS
The purpose of this research project is to evaluate the potential health risks of exposure to certain environmental chemicals, including metals, pesticides, and salts, through inhalation, ingestion, or dermal contact. These contaminants have been detected in air, water, and soil in Yuma County, Arizona, mainly due to industrial and agricultural operations in the area. Using epidemiological and statistical modeling techniques, an assessment of ecological impact and human health will be completed to shed light on the impact these toxicants can have on border communities. Ultimately, these analyses will guide translational research methods that can be used to suggest implementable practices that are more protective of human health by minimizing unacceptable exposures for workers and residents. 

RESEARCH PLAN
For this research, multivariate statistical modeling will be used to evaluate the relationships between contaminant concentrations and health outcomes, with the goal of describing population-level health impacts from aggregate exposures. Primary outcome variables of interest for the analysis of perchlorate exposures include hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, thyroid cancer, goiter, obesity, and other reproductive disorders. Previous studies have shown that exposure to perchlorate can affect iodine uptake by the endocrine system, leading to increased risk for these outcomes. Outcomes for metal exposures will focus on diabetes mellitus (DM), hypertension, cardiovascular diseases (CVD), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and stroke. Prior research has shown elevated risk of these outcomes for those exposed to increased concentrations of metals and metalloids, although additional studies considering these associations will be beneficial. 
Data for this analysis have been previously collected for metal concentrations in hair, perchlorate concentrations in urine, and hormone levels representing endocrine function in blood. Longitudinal concentrations for a similar sample population are also accessible for perchlorates in urine. Models will be developed to determine if relationships exist between the exposure levels and the health effects. Models will be adjusted to account for mediating, moderating, and confounding variables as necessary, including conditions of residency, socioeconomic status (SES), and other demographic characteristics. A robust principal component analysis (PCA) will be used to better control for outliers in skewed datasets, as are commonly found in biological samples.

PROJECT AIM
Model relationships between concentrations of metals and metalloids (As, Cd, Cu, Fe, Hg, Mn, Pb, and U) measured in hair samples and the prevalence of coronary, metabolic, and neurological disorders within the exposed community.
Hypothesis: Higher concentrations of metals in the environment correspond to increased levels of metals found in the hairs of study participants. Those with higher concentrations of biologically measured metals will have elevated prevalence of metabolic disorders (DM, gout, obesity), developmental disorders (congenital heart disease (CHD), weak kidneys), cardiovascular disorders (hypertension, stroke, angina, congestive heart failure (CHF), heart attack, high/low cholesterol), neurological disorders (ASD), and reproductive disorders (PCOS, undescended testes).


SAP
Quantitative associations between environmental pollutants and prevalence of negative health outcomes will be explored using well-established epidemiological and biostatistical analyses to determine if exposures are leading to increased risk of the outlined health concerns. Results will be presented to the community to inform decisions about intervention options as needed. Descriptive statistics will be used to summarize the sample data generally. Baseline levels of exposure will be estimated for these environmental contaminants. A robust principal component analysis (PCA) will be employed for the biological concentrations of the toxicants to minimize the effects of autocorrelated levels and to increase the statistical analyzing power by lowering the number of model inputs. Odds ratios and/or relative risk ratios will provide information about the sample population’s likelihood of experiencing health effects after exposures. Multivariate linear and logistic regressions will be run based on the input and outcome variable types (e.g., continuous or categorical). Parametric statistical models will be run when possible, assuming the assumptions have been met and including the use of data transformation where appropriate. Data will be assessed for confounders, mediators, and effect modifiers during model development. Where appropriate, biostatistical tests will be used to determine if there are significant differences between uniquely qualified groups, such as by gender, age, socioeconomic status, estimated exposure levels, and other relevant variables. The data collected from the EMR records will be compared to the self-report data collected from the surveys/interviews to verify congruence. 

Design, Population, and Sampling
A cross-sectional survey was conducted on participants recruited from three distinct locations, comprised of medical centers or community organizations housed within Yuma County, Arizona. The locations involved in recruitment included the Yuma Regional Medical Center (YMRC), the Regional Center for Border Health (RCBH), and the farmworker advocacy group Campesinos Sin Fronteras (CSF). Using a case-control study design, recruitment attempted to reach 50% of participants who had previously been diagnosed with at least one thyroid disease or disorder (hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, thyroid cancer, or goiter) and 50% of participants with no history of thyroid disease or disorder. Of the 323 participants recruited, 147 (45.5%) had a medical chart that indicated a history of thyroid disease or disorder. The same participants will be used for both the perchlorate analysis and the metal(loid)s analyses, as each participant supplied hair and blood samples, biometrics, and survey responses, although the two cohorts were specifically designed for the hormonal assays. Despite that the details of this project are for a specific sample population, the methods developed and used here can be applied to a broader audience for populations experiencing similar health risks.

Data Collection Procedures
Inclusion criteria required participants to be adults aged at least 18 years, residents of Yuma County, Arizona, and English- or Spanish-speaking. Consenting participants completed a health questionnaire that collected information regarding demographics, social determinants of health, health screenings, and occupational and environmental exposures to perchlorates and pesticides. Study participants completed the questionnaires as interviews with their health providers or community health workers (CHWs) in the language of their choice. Biological samples, including hair, blood, and urine, as well as BMI and blood pressure, were collected during a single study visit. Electronic medical records (EMRs) were gathered for participants who consented to grant researchers access to their official medical records. Participant data were compiled from April 20th to November 26th, 2018. 

Quantitative Variables
Sociodemographic information included age, sex, education, residency status, occupation, race/ethnicity, self-reported height and weight, self-reported smoking status, and self-reported medical conditions (e.g., thyroid cancer, hypertension, polycystic ovarian syndrome, diabetes mellitus). BMI was measured by dividing the participant’s weight (kg) by their squared height (m). Approximately 150 mg of hair, clipped with shears at the nape of the neck, was collected and stored at room temperature in paper envelopes. The clippings were later analyzed for metal and metalloid concentrations, specifically As, Cd, Cu, Fe, Hg, Mn, Pb, and U. Roughly 5-10 mL of blood was collected via venipuncture into heparinized (anti-coagulating) vacuum syringes and later centrifuged into plasma and other cellular fractions. Plasma was frozen at -80oC until processed and analyzed for relevant hormonal assays (TSH, T3, T4, and cortisol). Finally, urine was collected at a single time point for each participant and then stored at -20oC until analyzed for perchlorate levels. 

EMRs vs. Health Questionnaires
For health variables that are available in both the EMR and that were measured by our research team, consideration will be given to the accuracy and appropriateness of using one over the other. For instance, BMI measured by our group will be given preference, while medical diagnoses on EMRs, such as cardiovascular events or blood pressure measurements, will be preferred to self-reported data. When data is unavailable from the preferred data collection method, values will be supplemented by the other source. Where data are pulled from both sources, a comparison of the correlation between the two sources will be done using Pearson or Spearman tests for correlation for parametric and non-parametric data, respectively. 

Independent (Predictor) Variables
1. Metals and metalloids are likely spatially autocorrelated. Instead of considering each metal individually, a robust PCA showed that two groupings were most responsible for the spread of the data. Therefore, PC1 and PC2 will be used as surrogate independent variables for the regression modeling, focusing on general instead of individual toxicity.

Dependent (Outcome) Variables
The analysis will consider selected health indicators as outcome variables based on community input and agreement. 
1. Blood concentration levels of free and total TSH, T3, T4, and cortisol will be evaluated to determine if over- or under-production of these hormones is present by comparing to a normal threshold or national average. Data can be modeled either as continuous variables or as binary (yes/no) for normal levels.
2. Binary (presence/absence) health outcome values include cancer, cardiovascular disorders (hypertension, stroke, angina, congestive heart failure (CHF), heart attack, high/low cholesterol), developmental disorders (congenital heart disease (CHD), weak kidneys), endocrine disorders (goiter, thyroid disease, hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, thyroid cancer), metabolic disorders (DM, gout, obesity), neurological disorders (ASD), and reproductive disorders (PCOS, undescended testes).
3. Continuous health outcome data are available for obesity via body mass index (BMI) measurements and for hypertension via blood pressure measurements.

Mediators and Moderators, Confounders
Covariates that may act as mediators, moderators, and/or confounders include age, gender, occupation, SES (as income), residency status (year-round vs “snowbird”), race/ethnicity (and/or birth country?), and smoking status. Results of statistical tests that consider the interactions of these variables with the dependent and independent variables will elucidate if and how these factors may influence the model, with corrective adjustments or stratifications made when necessary.

Analytical Procedures
Associations between independent variables and health outcomes will be modeled using linear or logistic regression based on whether the data are parametric or nonparametric. Model selection techniques, such as Akaike Information Criterion corrected by sample size (AICc) and PCA analyses, will provide our team with the most economical model in terms of simplicity and accuracy. Data from our teams’ collection efforts will be treated preferentially, followed by EMR data and self-report data, respectively. Where missing health data exist, data collected from the EMR records will be compared to the self-report data collected from the surveys/interviews to verify collinearity using the Pearson or Spearman tests and to determine if substitution of missing data is appropriate. Concentration data below the limit of detection (LOD) will be replaced with half the square root of the LOD. 
Participant demographics and characteristics will be expressed as means (± SD) for quantifiable variables and as percentages for categorical variables. Descriptive statistics will be calculated for the concentrations of toxicants in biological samples (μg/g, µg/L, mU/L ) and compared to national averages and other similar studies. A robust principal component analysis (PCA) discovered two component groupings were responsible for approximately 80% of the variance within the metal(loid) hair concentration data. The normality of each continuous predictive parameter will be evaluated prior to model development by graphical visualization, comparison of median and mean values, and tested by the Shapiro-Wilk test. Skewed data, as is common in biological samples, will be transformed in order to use parametric tests or, if transforming does not normalize the data, nonparametric approaches will be used.
Linear or logistic regression models will be developed using concentrations of perchlorate and using results from the PCA (PC1, and PC1+PC2) as predictor variables, depending on the outcome variable types. Multiple regressions, adjusted when appropriate, will be conducted to evaluate the associations between each covariate and the biomarker concentrations. Multivariate regression analyses will be completed separately for PC1 and for PC1+PC2. Statistical significance will be set at p < 0.05, and 95% confidence intervals will also be used to verify significance. Finally, models will be externally validated using relevant National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) databases. Any bivariate or multivariate analyses for the categorical variables will use Spearman rank correlations and Kruskal-Wallis tests, while continuous variables will use Pearson correlations and ANOVA or MANOVA tests, respectively. Statistical analyses will be performed in RStudio Version 1.2.5033.
